hey this is pressed Elle Walker and
you're watching mind your decisions
here's a really fun problem from the
1995 mathematical Olympiad in Argentina
is it possible to write the eleven whole
numbers from 1985 to 1995 in some order
so that the 44 digit number you get is
prime why or why not provide a proof of
your answer I think Leon from Argentina
for suggesting this problem can you
figure it out give this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching the
video for a solution so before I get to
the solution I'll admit there are many
many puzzles that I'm not able to solve
by myself this includes Amazon's hanging
cable problem the hardest easy geometry
problem and many many more but this
problem I actually figured out in my
head and I got the insight in just one
minute so before I get to the solution I
want to tell a supposed story about
Picasso one day in the park
a woman offered to pay Picasso for a
portrait he quickly drew a sketch and
she replied wow you captured my essence
in just a few strokes how much do I owe
you
Picasso said it costs $10,000 stunned
the woman said how can it be so much you
only took one minute Picasso then
replied no Madame it took me my entire
life so bringing this back to mind your
decisions people often ask me how long
does it take you to make a video my
answer is the time for an individual
video only measures the marginal effort
each video has action
taken me a lifetime to make the lesson
is that solving problems is like an art
form you get better with lifelong
practice some habits that improve my
problem-solving skills are practicing my
times table as a child reading every
math book in my library for fun during
summer breaks and writing the best
mental math tricks it was in this book
that I reinforced the divisibility by 11
role which was the key principle to
solving this problem so here's a
solution the number can never be prime
it will always be divisible by 11
to explain why this is true let's review
the divisibility by 11 rule this states
that if the alternating sum of digits
from left to right is divisible by 11
then the number is divisible by 11 the
procedure is to take the first digit
then subtract the second then add the
third and subtract the fourth and so on
in other words you need to add up the
digits in the odd spots and then
subtract the digits in the even spots so
let's go over a few quick examples 77
will be 7 minus 7 which is 0 0 is
divisible by 11
so 77 is to consider 243 the alternating
sum is 2 minus 4 plus 3 which is equal
to 1 since 1 is not divisible by 11
243 is not divisible by 11
what about a more complicated number
like 90 1905 we first calculate the
alternating sum which is 22 and then we
conclude that 22 is divisible by 11
which means 90 1905 is also divisible by
11 so how can we use this principle for
our current problem well first let's
write the 11 numbers in descending order
we need to calculate the alternating sum
of this number we'll do that by first
calculating the sum of all the black
digits which is the digits in the odd
positions I'll write it out in long form
but this simplifies to be the following
and this is an easy calculation and it's
equal to 105 now let's calculate the sum
of the blue digits the digits in the
even positions I'll write it out in long
form and then we'll do a few
calculations and we'll simplify it and
it will equal 149 so the alternating sum
will be the sum of the black digits
minus the sum of the blue digits and
this will be equal to negative 44 since
negative 44 is divisible by 11 the
entire number is in fact the alternating
sum will be equal to negative 44 it will
be in variant no matter how we arrange
the 11 whole numbers from 1985 to 1995
so we've just shown that this particular
number is divisible by 11
but I'm going to claim it'll be true no
matter how we arrange these 11 numbers
the reason is that the black digits will
always be in odd positions and the blue
digits will always be in even positions
so let's say we rearrange the numbers
like this well the alternating sum is
still going to be the same because the
black digits are always in the odd
positions and the blue digits are always
in the even positions here's a little
bit more complicated over rearrangement
we're still gonna have the same
alternating sum of negative 44 it'll be
true no matter how we arrange these 11
numbers because each number has four
digits no matter how we rearrange them
we're always going to have the black
digits in odd positions and the blue
digits in even positions
therefore the alternating sum will
always be negative 44 and therefore the
resulting number will always be
divisible by 11 so now you know the
method to solve this problem and the
next time you see a similar problem you
might just be able to solve it instantly
in your head but should someone try to
diminish your mental feet remind them
you weren't born with this ability it
actually took you a lifetime of learning
to hone your problem-solving skills
thanks for watching these math videos
which are available for free on youtube
build confidence for students and
inspire mathematical discovery for
viewers around the world
they have over a hundred million views
and the channel has over 1 million
subscribers please subscribe for free to
get the newest videos and email me a
puzzle or math topic presh
and mind your decisions comm if you so
choose you can check out my merchandise
and my books which are listed in the
video description and you can support me
on patreon for exclusive rewards thanks
for watching and thanks for your support